---
title: The best calculator shortcut in Ubuntu
---

I only use python as a calculator. However a friend made me remark that it's
faster to hit the "Calc" key from your keyboard and use the default
`gnome-calculator`.  Although I don't quite agree since I always have a
terminal opened, I still decided to make some good use of this otherwise
superfluous "Calc" key.


# The best calculator:

I mapped a new shortcut to it. That's *my* calculator now:

    gnome-terminal --hide-menubar --geometry=60x20 -t Python -x python -Q new -i -c "from numpy import *"

A quick explanation:

It launches a new terminal (`gnome-terminal`) executing the command `python -Q new -i -c "from
numpy import *"`.

#### The gnome-terminal part:

* `--hide-menubar` disables the menu bar of the terminal (file, edit and so on)
* `--geometry=60x20`: terminal size of 60 columns x 20 lines
* `-t Python`: title of the windows is "Python"
* `-x`: everything after this is the command executed.

#### The python part:

* `-Q new` allow int/int divisions to return float values (no longer required
	to write points after numbers to make sure they are floats).
* `-c ...` execute the specified command.
* `-i` open the interactive shell after having executed the command.

Like this, I already have all numpy loaded, and I can type `pi`, `e`, `log` and
all those functions quite suited for a calculator.

All of this was just because I like to be the one that's right.

# The best calculator (bis):

I improved the previous solution by setting a specific gnome-terminal profile
for this task. It's cooler because I can set a different font (Inconsolata), a
more transparent background, and write the geometry, the window title and the
python command directly in the profile settings. This new profile is named
"Calculaterm", so I updated my keyboard shortcut to simply this:

    gnome-terminal --hide-menubar --window-with-profile=Calculaterm

