---
Title: Bioperl install tribulations
Date: 2021/03/08 15:17
---

The infamous Bioperl needs to be available (globally) for my current project.

Unfortunately, installing Perl modules does not make sense.

# How to install any Perl module


## Legacy or not legacy

First, there are two installers available:

- `cpan`, the legacy one.
- `cpanm` ("cpanminus"), a presumably better one (actually recommended).

Most of the time, `cpan` will be already installed on your system, but
cpanminus should be installed, e.g. from `APT` on Debian/Ubuntu (do that).

`cpan` is designed to be run as root, unless you install and configure `local::lib`.
"cpanminus" is designed to be run as a regular user.

Also, `cpan` requires to be configured at first use, and most people would
choose default settings, but I digged in the config options and many stuff
don't seem to make sense.

First, the configuration file is stored in the root user home directory (aka
`/root/`, which is annoying because you regular users don't have read access
here. And that fact does not appear to be configurable, of course.

By default, all other directories go there as well, in particular the Build
cache, and also the "prefs". To me, it does not appear consistent with
conventional linux system hierarchy, which would possibly use `/var/cache` and
`/var/lib/`, but it is only a guess based on my limited knowledge.

Anyway, even if installing as root, choose "cpanminus" !

Note that the default usage of cpan and cpanminus seem *compatible* (on my
machine, it installed to the same directory).

## CPAN anomalies

As surprising as it is for a legacy program present in all Perl distributions,
cpan has bugs. And annoying ones.

I used cpan 1.672, the default from Ubuntu 20.04. (At the time there is version
2.22).


* When running the interactive config, from the shell, plenty of prompted text
    do not appear correctly (entire sentences missing). They appear correct
    when the configuration is launched from the cpan interpreter with `o conf init`.
* The `-f` option (force install even when package tests failed) is ignored.
    Therefore there is no way to install a program with failing tests, even if
    unimportant (and I think this happens a lot, in bioinformatics at least).

## nice features from cpanminus

- Seamless user installations;
- cpanminus has a *uninstall* command;


# Installing "bioperl"

I must be bad at Googling, but I am still unsure how to install this one.

I tried both `cpanm BioPerl` and `cpanm Bio::Perl`, and interestingly both
worked, but the first command additionally installs a package file named
`BioPerl.pm`. I don't know what extra packages are installed by the second
command, but the naming is probably misleading (are we installing a "Perl" submodule
from the perl module "Bio" ??)

I also tried `cpanm Bio`, but this failed (no such package found).


